Introduction
Tomography refers to imaging by sections or sectioning, through the use of any kind of penetrating wave. This method is used in radiology, archaeology, biology, medicine, atmospheric science, geophysics, oceanography, plasma physics, materials science, astrophysics, and other sciences. In most cases it is based on the mathematical procedure called tomographic reconstruction.
Medical imaging is the technique and process of creating visual representations of the interior of a body for clinical analysis and medical intervention. Medical imaging seeks to reveal internal structures hidden by the skin and bones to diagnose and treat disease.
As a discipline and in its widest sense, it is part of biological imaging and includes radiology which uses the imaging technologies of X-ray radiography, magnetic resonance imaging, medical ultrasonography, endoscopy, thermography, medical photography and nuclear medicine functional imaging techniques as positron emission tomography.
X-ray computed tomography
X-ray computed tomography is a technology that uses computer-processed X-rays to produce tomographic images (virtual 'slices') of specific areas of a scanned object, allowing the user to see inside the object without cutting. Digital geometry processing is used to generate a three-dimensional image of the inside of the object from a large series of two-dimensional radiographic images taken around a single axis of rotation. Medical imaging is the most common application of X-ray CT. Its cross-sectional images are used for diagnostic purposes in various medical disciplines.
Brief history of CT
In the early 1900s, the Italian radiologist Alessandro Vallebona proposed a method to represent a single slice of the body on radiographic film. This method was known as tomography.
The mathematical theory behind computed tomographic reconstruction dates back to 1917 with the invention of Radon Transform by an Austrian mathematician Johann Radon. He showed mathematically that a function could be reconstructed from an infinite set of its projections.
The first commercially viable CT scanner was invented by Sir Godfrey Hounsfield in Hayes, United Kingdom, at EMI Central Research Laboratories using X-rays. Hounsfield conceived his idea in 1967. The first EMI-Scanner was installed in Atkinson Morley Hospital in Wimbledon, England.
Process and algorithms
X-ray data is generated using an X-ray source that rotates around the object; X-ray sensors are positioned on the opposite side of the circle from the X-ray source. 
Initial machines would rotate the X-ray source and detectors around a stationary object. Following a complete rotation, the object would be moved along its axis, and the next rotation started. Newer machines permitted continuous rotation with the object to be imaged slowly and smoothly slid through the X-ray ring. These are called helical or spiral computer tomography machines. A subsequent development of helical computer tomography was multi-slice (or multi-detector) computer tomography; instead of a single row of detectors, multiple rows of detectors are used effectively capturing multiple cross-sections simultaneously. Systems with a very large number of detector rows, such that the z-axis coverage is comparable to the xy-axis coverage are often termed cone beam CT, due to the shape of the X-ray beam (strictly, the beam is pyramidal in shape, rather than conical).
A visual representation of the raw data obtained is called a sinogram, yet it is not sufficient for interpretation. Once the scan data has been acquired, the data must be processed using a form of tomographic reconstruction. In terms of mathematics, the raw data acquired by the scanner consists of multiple "projections" of the object being scanned.
The reconstruction of projection data from medical Computed Tomography  scanners has been historically done based on analytical inversion methods like the so-called filtered back projection. These methods are robust, relatively easy and have moderate processing requirements. 
An alternative to these methods are statistical and iterative reconstruction methods. These methods provide decreased noise in the reconstructed images compared to filtered back projection. This advantage can either be used to improve the image quality of computer tomography images, or, more important it can be used to lower the amount of X-ray dose used in the examination and still provides the same image quality as filtered back projection methods with higher dose. Dose savings from 50% up to 90% have been reported. However, the price of this improvement is an enormous amount of processing effort required for iterative reconstruction. This was a major burden for the introduction of iterative reconstruction in routine clinical computer tomography imaging.
A promising class of iterative reconstruction methods is formed by statistical reconstruction algorithms.
In these algorithms we fragment an object to voxels. A voxel represents a value of absorption coefficient of X-rays on a regular grid in three-dimensional space.
Statistical algorithms attempt to maximize a cost function that consists of a likelihood term which compares the fitness of the intermediate image with the measured data (it is probability of reconstructed image towards the measured values) and a regularization term to penalize noise or a “rough” solution in the image. 
ICD: One iteration consists the loop over all blocks; to one voxel we fix all the coordinates except current and solve the problem of one-dimensional optimization.
ABCD: in is a variation of ICD. We update a block of all N_z voxels along an axial line simultaneously. Loop over all x, y sequentially. Use separable quadratic surrogates for cost function.
Сomputer tomography is used in medicine as a diagnostic tool and as a guide for interventional procedures. Sometimes contrast materials such as intravenous iodinated contrast are used. This is useful to highlight structures such as blood vessels that otherwise would be difficult to delineate from their surroundings. Using contrast material can also help to obtain functional information about tissues.
Three-dimensional visualization
Because contemporary CT scanners offer isotropic or near isotropic resolution, display of images does not need to be restricted to the axial images. Instead, it is possible for a software program to build a volume by "stacking" the individual slices one on top of the other. The program may then display the volume in an alternative manner.
Multiplanar reconstruction is the simplest method of reconstruction. A volume is built by stacking the axial slices. The software then cuts slices through the volume in a different plane (usually orthogonal). As an option, a special projection method, such as maximum-intensity projection or minimum-intensity projection, can be used to build the reconstructed slices.
This is a typical screen layout for diagnostic software, showing one 3D and three MPR views.
There are three kinds of visualization, which usually used.
Surface rendering. 
A threshold value of radiodensity is set by the operator. From this, a three-dimensional model can be constructed using edge detection image processing algorithms and displayed on screen. Multiple models can be constructed from various thresholds, allowing different colors to represent each anatomical component such as bone, muscle, and cartilage. However, the interior structure of each element is not visible in this mode of operation.
Volume rendering.
Surface rendering is limited in that it will display only surfaces that meet a threshold density, and will display only the surface that is closest to the imaginary viewer. In volume rendering, transparency, colors and shading are used to allow a better representation of the volume to be shown in a single image. For example, the bones of the pelvis could be displayed as semi-transparent, so that one part of the image does not hide another.
Image segmentation.
Where different structures have similar radiodensity, it can become impossible to separate them simply by adjusting volume rendering parameters. The solution is called segmentation, a manual or automatic procedure that can remove the unwanted structures from the image.

Dose vs image quality
An important issue within radiology today is how to reduce the radiation dose during computer tomography examinations without compromising the image quality. In general, higher radiation doses result in higher-resolution images, while lower doses lead to increased image noise and unsharp images. However, increased dosage raises increase the adverse side effects, including the risk of radiation induced cancer – a four-phase abdominal computer tomography gives the same radiation dose as 300 chest X-rays. New statistical methods that can reduce the exposure to ionizing radiation during a computer tomography scan exist.
Solutions of this problems:
	New software technology can reduce the required radiation dose.
	We should individualize the examination and adjust the radiation dose to the body type and body organ examined. Different body types and organs require different amounts of radiation.
	Prior to every computer tomography examination, evaluate the appropriateness of the exam whether it is motivated or if another type of examination is more suitable.


MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging is a medical imaging technique used in radiology to investigate the anatomy and physiology of the body in both health and disease. MRI scanners use strong magnetic fields and radio waves to form images of the body. The technique is widely used in hospitals for medical diagnosis, staging of disease and for follow-up without exposure to ionizing radiation.
Brief history of MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging was invented by Paul C. Lauterbur in September 1971; he published the theory behind it in March 1973. The factors leading to image contrast (differences in tissue relaxation time values) had been described nearly 20 years earlier by Erik Odeblad (physician and scientist).
During the 1970s a team led by Scottish professor John Mallard built the first full body MRI scanner at the University of Aberdeen.  Mallard and his team are credited for technological advances that led to the widespread introduction of MRI.
Reflecting the fundamental importance and applicability of MRI in medicine, Paul Lauterbur  and Sir Peter Mansfield  were awarded the 2003 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their "discoveries concerning magnetic resonance imaging".

How MRI works
To perform a study, the patient is positioned within an MRI scanner which forms a strong magnetic field around the area to be imaged. In most medical applications, protons (hydrogen atoms) in tissues containing water molecules are used to create a signal that is processed to form an image of the body. First, energy from an oscillating magnetic field is temporarily applied to the patient at the appropriate resonant frequency. The excited hydrogen atoms emit a radio frequency signal which is measured by a receiver coil. The radio signal can be made to encode position information by varying the main magnetic field using gradient coils. As these coils are rapidly switched on and off they create the characteristic repetitive noises of an MRI scan. The contrast between different tissues is determined by the rate at which excited atoms return to the equilibrium state. 
MRI requires a magnetic field that is both strong and uniform. The field strength of the magnet is measured in tesla – and while the majority of systems operate at 1.5T, commercial systems are available between 0.2T–7T. Most clinical magnets are superconducting which requires liquid helium. The lower field strengths can be achieved with permanent magnets.
Image contrast may be weighted to demonstrate different anatomical structures or pathologies. Each tissue returns to its equilibrium state after excitation by the independent processes of T1 (spin-lattice) and T2 (spin-spin) relaxation. 
Spin–lattice relaxation is the mechanism by which the z component of the magnetization vector comes into thermodynamic equilibrium with its surroundings (the "lattice") in nuclear magnetic resonance and magnetic resonance imaging. It is characterized by the spin–lattice relaxation time, a time constant known as T1. It is named in contrast to T2, the spin-spin relaxation time.
In physics, the spin–spin relaxation is the mechanism by which Mxy, the transverse component of the magnetization vector, exponentially decays towards its equilibrium value in nuclear magnetic resonance and magnetic resonance imaging. It is characterized by the spin–spin relaxation time, known as T2, a time constant characterizing the signal decay.
To create a T1-weighted image more magnetization is allowed to recover before measuring the MR signal by changing the repetition time. To create a T2-weighted image more magnetization is allowed to decay before measuring the magnetic resonance signal by changing the echo time. This images weighting are useful for the different body area to be imaged.
MRI contrast agents
MRI contrast agents are a group of contrast media used to improve the visibility of internal body structures in magnetic resonance imaging. The most usually used compounds for contrast enhancement are gadolinium-based. MRI contrast agents shorten the relaxation times of atoms within body tissues where they are present after oral or intravenous administration. In MRI scanners sections of the body are exposed to a very strong magnetic field, then a radiofrequency pulse is applied causing a tip of the net magnetization generated from hydrogen nuclei. Signal can then be detected. Relaxation mechanisms will bring the net magnetization back to its equilibrium position with a characteristic time T1. Water protons in different tissues have different T1 values, which is one of the main sources of contrast in images. A contrast agent shortens the value of T1 of nearby water protons, such that the contrast in the image is modified.
Safety of MRI
All patients are reviewed for contraindications prior to MRI scanning. Medical devices and implants are categorized as MR Safe, MR Conditional or MR Unsafe.
MR-Safe — The device or implant is completely non-magnetic, non-electrically conductive, and non radiofrequency reactive, eliminating all of the primary potential threats during an MRI procedure.
MR-Conditional — A device or implant that may contain magnetic, electrically conductive or radiofrequency -reactive components that is safe for operations in proximity to the MRI, provided the conditions for safe operation are defined and observed (such as 'tested safe to 1.5 teslas' or 'safe in magnetic fields below 500 gauss in strength').
MR-Unsafe — Objects that are significantly ferromagnetic and pose a clear and direct threat to persons and equipment within the magnet room.

The MRI environment may cause harm in patients with MR-Unsafe devices such as most permanent pacemakers. Many implants can be safely scanned if the appropriate conditions are adhered to. MR Conditional pacemakers are increasingly available for selected patients. Ferromagnetic foreign bodies such as metallic implants, surgical prostheses are also potential risks.Titanium and its alloys are safe from attraction and torque forces produced by the magnetic field.
Comparison of CT and MRI
Using
A computer tomography Scan is best suited for viewing bone injuries, diagnosing lung and chest problems, and detecting cancers. An MRI is suited for examining soft tissue in ligament and tendon injuries, spinal cord injuries, brain tumors, etc. CT scans are widely used in emergency rooms because the scan takes fewer than 5 minutes. An MRI, on the other hand, can take up to 30 minutes.
Radiation exposure
The effective radiation dose from CT ranges from 2 to 10 mSv, which is about the same as the average person receives from background radiation in 3 to 5 years. Usually, computer tomography is not recommended for pregnant women or children unless absolutely necessary. But MRI machines do not emit ionizing radiation.
Cost
Computer tomography scan usually cost less than MRIs (about half the price of MRI).  MRI usually more expensive than  computer tomography scans and X-rays, and most examining methods.
Details of the structure
A major advantage of computer tomography is that it is able to image bone, soft tissue and blood vessels all at the same time. MRI provides much more soft tissue detail than a  computer tomography scan. But computer tomography provides good details about bony structures.
Limitation for scanning patients
Patients with metal implants can get computer tomography scan. For patients with Cardiac Pacemakers, tattoos and metal implants MRI contraindicats due to possible injury to patient or image distortion.
 Computer tomography more harmfull then MRI and contraindicats in pregnant.
There are a lot of limitation for MRI and computed tomography with contrast.
Conclusion
MRI and computed tomography are complementary imaging technologies and each has advantages and limitations for particular applications. Computed tomography is more widely used than MRI in with a mean of 132 vs 46 exams per 1000. 