Gigantic Radio Telescope to Search for First Stars and Galaxies
The array could be the most complex and versatile radio telescope ever attempted, with the capacity to sweep the entire northern sky in 45 days for low-frequency radio waves
By Charles Q. Choi and SPACE.com  | January 31, 2012 
More than 20,000 radio antennas will soon connect over the Internet to scan largely unexplored radio frequencies, hunting for the first stars and galaxies and potentially signals of extraterrestrial intelligence.
The Low Frequency Array (LOFAR) will consist of banks of antennas in 48 stations in the Netherlands and elsewhere in Europe, all hooked up by fiber optic cables. Signals from these stations will be combined using a supercomputer, transforming the array into "perhaps the most complex and versatile radio telescope ever attempted," said Heino Falcke, chairman of the board for the International LOFAR Telescope.
Currently 16,000 of LOFAR's antennas and 41 of its stations are up, and the array will be completed by the middle of this year. All told, LOFAR will have a resolution equivalent to a telescope 620 miles (1,000 kilometers) in diameter. In addition, "it's an expandable design — we can always come along later and add additional stations," said Michael Wise at ASTRON, the Netherlands Institute for Radio Astronomy.
Since LOFAR is so large, it can scan large parts of the heavens — its first all-sky survey, which started Jan. 9, can sweep across "the entire northern sky twice in just 45 days," said George Heald of ASTRON.
LOFAR is also very fast, capable of measuring events only five-billionths of a second long. In addition, the fact that LOFAR is essentially many different radio telescopes knit together means it can run, say, three different science projects simultaneously, Wise said.
The array is designed to monitor low-frequency radio waves, a largely unexplored part of radiation from the sky. One critical source of these radio emissions are extremely feeble signals from the cold hydrogen gas that dominated the cosmos during the so-called dark ages of the universe. As stars eventually came into being, they would have left scars on this hydrogen, and by analyzing how the radio signals from this gas changed over time, scientists can therefore learn much about how the first galaxies came to be.  [Infographic Tour: History & Structure of the Universe]
"This is a pivotal phase in the early evolution of the universe, stretching from 400 million to 800 million years after the Big Bang," said Ger de Bruyn of ASTRON. "We'd like to know when exactly it happened, how it happened, how fast it happened."
LOFAR will also scan for artificial radio emissions as part of the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI). Past SETI missions focused on higher frequency radio waves, but perhaps alien civilizations preferred lower frequencies.
"LOFAR can do interesting SETI experiments," Falcke told SPACE.com. "In the next couple of years, we'll be trying it."
Low-frequency radio waves are also emitted around intensely powerful cosmic objects such as black holes, and investigating these could help scientists better understand the inner workings of these ferocious systems. For instance, when it comes to pulsars — the highly magnetized and rapidly rotating neutron stars that can form after supernovas — LOFAR can monitor radio emissions from within about 60 miles (100 kilometers) of the pulsar's surface, said Jason Hessels of ASTRON.
LOFAR will open its capabilities to astronomers internationally starting in May. Scientists at LOFAR detailed their work earlier this month at the 219th annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Austin, Texas.
New Telescope Opens Its Eye
By Tracy Staedter  | October 27, 2005 | 
fter 20 years of planning, developing and constructing, astronomers at the Max Planck Institute for Astronomy have finally released the first image captured by the new Large Binocular Telescope, an instrument with a light-gathering power 24 times greater than the Hubble Space Telescope. The so-called LBT, an American-German-Italian joint venture stationed on the 3,190-meter-high Mt. Graham in Arizona, will be able to image planets circling distant stars and is poised to help answer fundamental questions about the universe, including how galaxies, stars and planets evolved from the big bang.
"The LBT will open completely new possibilities in researching planets outside the solar system and the investigation of the farthest--and thus youngest--galaxies," says Thomas Henning of the Max Planck Institute for Astronomy. To date, a handful of impressive ground-based telescopes have provided astronomers with important insights about the universe. For example, they have learned that stars form in dense cloudlike features within galaxies. But observing the intricacies of star birth is difficult with these telescopes because the radiating energy of low-mass stars and brown dwarfs is not bright enough to be visible and interstellar dust can obscure views. The Hubble Space Telescope has helped overcome some of these problems, but this kind of instrument is expensive to build, launch and maintain.
Now a combination of advanced optics, instrumentation and high-power computers is making it possible for ground-based telescopes, particularly those situated on high mountaintops, to see deeper into space than ever before at a fraction of the cost. The LBT can resolve faint objects because it has two large mirrors--each 8.4 meters in diameter--that focus like field glasses for viewing. By combining the two views, the instrument is able to collect as much light as a single telescope with an 11.8-meter mirror. By comparison, the Hubble Space Telescope's mirror is 2.4 meters in diameter.
But the LBT doesn't rely only on its mirrors. It uses optics designed to adapt to observing conditions and it works with a combination of specialized instruments that can do such things as gather infrared images, detect the composition of the surface of stars, compensate for the blurring caused by turbulence in Earth's atmosphere, and boost image sharpness to a quality far better than that of Hubble.
For the "first light" image, astronomers used just one of LBT's mirrors to capture a spiral galaxy in the constellation Andromeda. In the future, they will use both mirrors to conduct a number of studies, including observing the Jupiterlike planets known to be revolving around our nearest neighboring stars.
Dome Big Dome: Giant Observatories Augur New Era of Cosmology
When a new generation of giant ground-based telescopes comes online in the next decade, human eyes will see what no one has seen before
By Bruce Lieberman  | February 24, 200
Four centuries ago Galileo pointed hisspyglass toward the heavens and astronomy changed forever. As the world celebrates the 400th anniversary of the telescope, another cosmological revolution is coming: The Giant Magellan Telescope (GMT), Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) and European Extremely Large Telescope (E-ELT)—all expected to see first light by 2020—will dwarf the biggest observatories in use today.
The largest, the 42-meter (138-foot) E-ELT, will gather 15 times more light than today's 10-meter (33-foot) optical telescopes. TMT, with its 30-meter- (98.5-foot-) diameter primary mirror, and GMT, delivering the resolving power of a 24.5-meter (80-foot) reflector, will also outclass any current optical telescope.
Astronomers have always wanted bigger telescopes to resolve ever fainter objects. Large-diameter telescopes, essentially big light buckets, collect more photons for a given amount of observing time. Bigger mirrors also boost a telescope's angular resolution, or its ability to measure the separation between two close objects.
This next generation of big telescopes follows the leap in technology achieved with theW. M. Keck Observatory on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, in the 1990s.
"We've been using the Keck telescopes for 10 years and we saw … the limitations of 10-meter apertures," says Chuck Steidel, professor of astronomy at the California Institute of Technology and chair of the Science Advisory Committee for TMT. "So we started thinking: there's going to be a next-generation ground-based telescope, (and) we need to start thinking about it now."
The race to build the observatories is driven in part by "not wanting to be left behind," Steidel says. "There's plenty of science to occupy multiple versions of these telescopes. … Having one of these to be shared for the whole world—that would be a shame, actually, because there's more than one telescope worth of things to be doing."
But size isn't everything. These telescopes will rely on adaptive-optics technology that incorporates a deformable (shape-changing) mirror to cancel out atmospheric turbulence. That is expected to make these scopes perform as well as any space-based visible-wavelength observatory—including the Hubble Space Telescope. Collectively, they are expected to illuminate an epoch when the first stars and galaxies lit up the void more than 12 billion years ago, probe the atmospheres of exoplanets, and unveil the exotic physics of supermassive black holes at the center of the Milky Way as well as distant galaxies.
For Avi Loeb, a theoretical physicist and professor of astronomy at Harvard University, these instruments will allow researchers to add the missing pages from astronomy's "photo album of the universe."
"In order to probe deeper into the universe, you really need bigger and bigger telescopes," Loeb says. "Modern telescopes allow us to see galaxies when the universe was a billion years old. We would like to see the very first galaxies. … This is sort of the first chapter of Genesis—'Let there be light.'"
Closer to home, obtaining spectra from planets orbiting other stars could be within the reach of these next-generation telescopes, says Paul Kalas, the University of California, Berkeley, astronomer who used Hubble to take the first ' visible-light image of an exoplanet called Fomalhaut b—25 light-years from Earth. "We're lucky enough to see it as a point of light, but to disperse that light and to obtain even a low-resolution spectrum seems beyond the capabilities that we have today," Kalas says.
With unprecedented angular resolution and light-collecting capacity, the new telescopes should be able to focus the light of stars so sharply that astronomers will be able to discern planets close enough to the star where Earth analogues might be found, Kalas says. Spectral analysis of such planets may reveal biomarkers such as oxygen, methane and nitrous oxide.
GMT, TMT and E-ELT are expected to work in partnership with space telescopes and other ground-based observatories. For example, NASA's James Webb Space Telescope, scheduled to launch in 2013, will catalogue some of the universe's most distant objects in the infrared. The three optical telescopes will then examine those objects in more detail.
Modern astronomy is inherently a multiwavelength enterprise, with distinct instruments deployed to characterize objects according to the types of photons they emit across the electromagnetic spectrum, from radio to gamma rays. That's making large-aperture optical instruments increasingly relevant, Steidel says. "You're going to be extremely relied upon to understand things that are discovered with these other facilities, because there's really nothing more sensitive than spectroscopy in the optical or near-infrared with a large-aperture [telescope] from the ground," Steidel says.
E-ELT, projected to cost 950 million euros, or about $1.2 billion, is sponsored by the European Southern Observatory. Candidate sites are in Chile, Argentina, Spain and Morocco.
TMT, at $754 million in 2006 dollars, is a partnership among the Caltech, the University of California, and the Association of Canadian Universities for Research in Astronomy (ACURA). There are two candidate sites: Mauna Kea in Hawaii and Cerro Armazones in Chile's Atacama Desert.
The GMT, estimated at $650 million, is supported by the Carnegie Institution of Washington and eight other astronomical research organizations in the U.S., Australia and South Korea. It's scheduled to be built at Las Campanas Observatory in the Atacama.
E-ELT and TMT are being designed similarly with thin, segmented mirrors arrayed as a contiguous primary mirror. The 42-meter primary mirror of the E-ELT will be composed of 984 segments, whereas the 30-meter primary for TMT will comprise 492 segments.
The GMT opted for seven, 8.4-meter (27.6-foot) honeycomb mirrors mounted together as a primary. Mechanically the mirrors will be very stiff, and because of their largely hollow structure they'll be relatively light, GMT Acting Director Pat McCarthy says.
The three projects, in a race to first light, have nonetheless shared some collective knowledge about their science goals, the quality of potential sites, and other challenges.
"There's always competition, a sportsman's spirit," says Markus Kissler-Patig, an E-ELT project scientist. "We want to make the first discoveries…but despite the competitive spirit my wish is that all three projects really happen."