Gold
“Element 79” redirects here. For the short story and
anthology by Fred Hoyle, see Element 79 (anthology).
This article is about the element. For the color, see Gold
(color). For other uses, see Gold (disambiguation).
Gold is a chemical element with symbol Au (from Latin:
aurum) and atomic number 79. In its purest form, it is a
bright, slightly reddish yellow, dense, soft, malleable, and
ductile metal. Chemically, gold is a transition metal and
a group 11 element. It is one of the least reactive chemical
elements and is solid under standard conditions. Gold
often occurs in free elemental (native) form, as nuggets
or grains, in rocks, in veins, and in alluvial deposits. It
occurs in a solid solution series with the native element
silver (as electrum) and also naturally alloyed with copper
and palladium. Less commonly, it occurs in minerals as
gold compounds, often with tellurium (gold tellurides).
Gold’s atomic number of 79 makes it one of the higher
numbered, naturally occurring elements. It is thought to
have been produced in supernova nucleosynthesis, from
the collision of neutron stars,[6] and to have been present
in the dust from which the Solar System formed. Because
the Earth was molten when it was formed, almost all of
the gold present in the early Earth probably sank into the
planetary core. Therefore, most of the gold that is present
today in the Earth’s crust and mantle is thought to have
been delivered to Earth later, by asteroid impacts during
the Late Heavy Bombardment, about 4 billion years
ago.[7][8]
Gold is resistant to most acids, though it does dissolve in
aqua regia, a mixture of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid,
which forms a soluble tetrachloroaurate anion. Gold is
insoluble in nitric acid, which dissolves silver and base
metals, a property that has long been used to refine gold
and to confirm the presence of gold in metallic objects,
giving rise to the term acid test. Gold also dissolves in
alkaline solutions of cyanide, which are used in mining
and electroplating. Gold dissolves in mercury, forming
amalgam alloys, but this is not a chemical reaction.
Historically, the value of gold was rooted in its relative
rarity[9], easy handling and minting, easy smelting and
fabrication, resistance to corrosion and other chemical
reactions (nobility) and its distinctive color.[10] As a
precious metal, gold has been used for coinage, jewelry,
and other arts throughout recorded history. In the past, a
gold standard was often implemented as a monetary policy,
but gold coins ceased to be minted as a circulating
currency in the 1930s, and the world gold standard was
abandoned for a fiat currency system after 1976.
A total of 186,700 tonnes of gold is in existence
above ground, as of 2015.[11] The world consumption
of new gold produced is about 50% in jewelry, 40%
in investments, and 10% in industry.[12] Gold’s high
malleability, ductility, resistance to corrosion and most
other chemical reactions, and conductivity of electricity
have led to its continued use in corrosion resistant
electrical connectors in all types of computerized devices
(its chief industrial use). Gold is also used in
infrared shielding, colored-glass production, gold leafing,
and tooth restoration. Certain gold salts are still
used as anti-inflammatories in medicine. As of 2014, the
world’s largest gold producer by far was China with 450
tonnes.[13]
1 Etymology
“Gold” is cognate with similar words in many Germanic
languages, deriving via Proto-Germanic *gulþą from
Proto-Indo-European *ǵʰelh₃- (“to shine, to gleam; to be
yellow or green”).[14][15]
The symbol Au is from the Latin: aurum, the Latin word
for “gold”.[16] The Proto-Indo-European ancestor of aurum
was *h₂é-h₂us-o-, meaning “glow”. This word is derived
from the same root (Proto-Indo-European *h₂u̯es-
“to dawn”) as *h₂éu̯sōs, the ancestor of the Latin word
Aurora, “dawn”.[17] This etymological relationship is presumably
behind the frequent claim in scientific publications
that aurum meant “shining dawn”.[18]
2 Characteristics
Gold is the most malleable of all metals; a single gram
can be beaten into a sheet of 1 square meter, and an
avoirdupois ounce into 300 square feet. Gold leaf can
be beaten thin enough to become semi-transparent. The
transmitted light appears greenish blue, because gold
strongly reflects yellow and red.[20] Such semi-transparent
sheets also strongly reflect infrared light, making them
useful as infrared (radiant heat) shields in visors of heatresistant
suits, and in sun-visors for spacesuits.[21] Gold is
a good conductor of heat and electricity.
Gold has a density of 19.3 g/cm3, almost identical to that
of tungsten at 19.25 g/cm3; as such, tungsten has been
used in counterfeiting of gold bars, such as by plating a
1
2 3 CHEMISTRY
Gold is extremely ductile. It can be drawn into a monoatomic
wire, and then stretched about twice before it breaks.[19]
tungsten bar with gold,[22][23][24][25] or taking an existing
gold bar, drilling holes, and replacing the removed gold
with tungsten rods.[26] By comparison, the density of lead
is 11.34 g/cm3, and that of the densest element, osmium,
is 22.588 ± 0.015 g/cm3.[27]
3 Chemistry
Gold(III) chloride solution in water
Although gold is the most noble of the noble metals,[
28][29] it still forms many diverse compounds. The
oxidation state of gold in its compounds ranges from −1 to
+5, but Au(I) and Au(III) dominate its chemistry. Au(I),
referred to as the aurous ion, is the most common oxidation
state with soft ligands such as thioethers, thiolates,
and tertiary phosphines. Au(I) compounds are typically
linear. A good example is Au(CN)2−, which is the soluble
form of gold encountered in mining. The binary
gold halides, such as AuCl, form zigzag polymeric chains,
again featuring linear coordination at Au. Most drugs
based on gold are Au(I) derivatives.[30]
Au(III) (auric) is a common oxidation state, and is illustrated
by gold(III) chloride, Au2Cl6. The gold atom
centers in Au(III) complexes, like other d8 compounds,
are typically square planar, with chemical bonds that have
both covalent and ionic character.
Gold does not react with oxygen at any temperature[31]
and, up to 100° C, is resistant to attack from ozone.[32]
Some free halogens react with gold.[33] Gold is strongly
attacked by fluorine at dull-red heat[34] to form gold(III)
fluoride. Powdered gold reacts with chlorine at 180 °C to
form AuCl3.[35] Gold reacts with bromine at 140 °C to
form gold(III) bromide, but reacts only very slowly with
iodine to form the monoiodide.
Gold does not react with sulfur directly,[36] but gold(III)
sulfide can be made by passing hydrogen sulfide through
a dilute solution of gold(III) chloride or chlorauric acid.
Gold readily dissolves in mercury at room temperature to
form an amalgam, and forms alloys with many other metals
at higher temperatures. These alloys can be produced
to modify the hardness and other metallurgical properties,
to control melting point or to create exotic colors.[37]
Gold reacts with potassium, rubidium, caesium, or
tetramethylammonium, to form the respective auride
salts, containing the Au− ion. Caesium auride is perhaps
the most famous.
Gold is unaffected by most acids. It does not react
with hydrofluoric, hydrochloric, hydrobromic, hydriodic,
sulfuric, or nitric acid. It does react with aqua regia,
a mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids, and with
selenic acid. Aqua regia, a 1:3 mixture of nitric acid and
hydrochloric acid, dissolves gold. Nitric acid oxidizes the
metal to +3 ions, but only in minute amounts, typically
undetectable in the pure acid because of the chemical
equilibrium of the reaction. However, the ions are removed
from the equilibrium by hydrochloric acid, forming
AuCl4− ions, or chloroauric acid, thereby enabling
further oxidation.
Gold is similarly unaffected by most bases. It does
not react with aqueous, solid, or molten sodium or
potassium hydroxide. It does however, react with sodium
or potassium cyanide under alkaline conditions when
oxygen is present to form soluble complexes.[36]
Common oxidation states of gold include +1 (gold(I)
or aurous compounds) and +3 (gold(III) or auric compounds).
Gold ions in solution are readily reduced and
precipitated as metal by adding any other metal as the
reducing agent. The added metal is oxidized and dissolves,
allowing the gold to be displaced from solution
3.4 Isotopes 3
and be recovered as a solid precipitate.
3.1 Less common oxidation states
Less common oxidation states of gold include −1, +2, and
+5.
The −1 oxidation state occurs in compounds containing
the Au− anion, called aurides. Caesium auride
(CsAu), for example, crystallizes in the caesium chloride
motif.[38] Other aurides include those of Rb+, K+, and
tetramethylammonium (CH3)4N+.[39] Gold has the highest
Pauling electronegativity of any metal, with a value of
2.54, making the auride anion relatively stable.
Gold(II) compounds are usually diamagnetic with Au–Au
bonds such as [Au(CH2)2P(C6H5)2]2Cl2. The evaporation
of a solution of Au(OH)
3 in concentrated H
2SO
4 produces red crystals of gold(II) sulfate, Au2(SO4)2.
Originally thought to be a mixed-valence compound, it
has been shown to contain Au4+
2 cations, analogous to the better-known mercury(I) ion,
Hg2+
2 .[40][41] A gold(II) complex, the tetraxenonogold(II)
cation, which contains xenon as a ligand, occurs in
[AuXe4](Sb2F11)2.[42]
Gold pentafluoride, along with its derivative anion, AuF−
6, and its difluorine complex, gold heptafluoride, is the
sole example of gold(V), the highest verified oxidation
state.[43]
Some gold compounds exhibit aurophilic bonding, which
describes the tendency of gold ions to interact at distances
that are too long to be a conventional Au–Au bond but
shorter than van der Waals bonding. The interaction is estimated
to be comparable in strength to that of a hydrogen
bond.
3.2 Mixed valence compounds
Well-defined cluster compounds are numerous.[39] In
such cases, gold has a fractional oxidation state.
A representative example is the octahedral species
{Au(P(C6H5)3)}62+. Gold chalcogenides, such as gold
sulfide, feature equal amounts of Au(I) and Au(III).
3.3 Color
Whereas most metals are gray or silvery white, gold is
slightly reddish yellow.[44] This color is determined by the
density of loosely bound (valence) electrons; those electrons
oscillate as a collective “plasma” medium described
in terms of a quasiparticle called a plasmon. The frequency
of these oscillations lies in the ultraviolet range for
most metals, but it falls into the visible range for gold due
Silver 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
(Ag)
Copper
(Cu)
Gold
(Au)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
whitish
white
pale
greenish
yellow
yellowish
yellow
green
yellow
red
yellow
reddish
copper
red
wt% Ag
wt% Au
wt% Cu
Different colors of Ag-Au-Cu alloys
to subtle relativistic effects that affect the orbitals around
gold atoms.[45][46] Similar effects impart a golden hue to
metallic caesium.
Common colored gold alloys include the distinctive
eighteen-karat rose gold created by the addition of copper.
Alloys containing palladium or nickel are also important
in commercial jewelry as these produce white gold
alloys. Fourteen-karat gold-copper alloy is nearly identical
in color to certain bronze alloys, and both may be
used to produce police and other badges. White gold alloys
can be made with palladium or nickel. Fourteenand
eighteen-karat gold alloys with silver alone appear
greenish-yellow and are referred to as green gold. Blue
gold can be made by alloying with iron, and purple gold
can be made by alloying with aluminium. Less commonly,
addition of manganese, aluminium, indium and
other elements can produce more unusual colors of gold
for various applications.[37]
Colloidal gold, used by electron-microscopists, is red if
the particles are small; larger particles of colloidal gold
are blue.
3.4 Isotopes
Main article: Isotopes of gold
Gold has only one stable isotope, 197
Au, which is also its only naturally occurring isotope, so
gold is both a mononuclidic and monoisotopic element.
Thirty-six radioisotopes have been synthesized ranging in
atomic mass from 169 to 205. The most stable of these
is 195
Au with a half-life of 186.1 days. The least stable is 171
Au, which decays by proton emission with a half-life of
30 μs. Most of gold’s radioisotopes with atomic masses
below 197 decay by some combination of proton emission,
α decay, and β+ decay. The exceptions are 195
4 4 MODERN APPLICATIONS
Au, which decays by electron capture, and 196
Au, which decays most often by electron capture (93%)
with a minor β− decay path (7%).[47] All of gold’s radioisotopes
with atomic masses above 197 decay by β−
decay.[48]
At least 32 nuclear isomers have also been characterized,
ranging in atomic mass from 170 to 200. Within that
range, only 178
Au, 180
Au, 181
Au, 182
Au, and 188
Au do not have isomers. Gold’s most stable isomer is
198m2
Au with a half-life of 2.27 days. Gold’s least stable isomer
is 177m2
Au with a half-life of only 7 ns. 184m1
Au has three decay paths: β+ decay, isomeric transition,
and alpha decay. No other isomer or isotope of gold has
three decay paths.[48]
4 Modern applications
The world consumption of new gold produced is about
50% in jewelry, 40% in investments, and 10% in
industry.[12]
4.1 Jewelry
Main article: Jewelry
Because of the softness of pure (24k) gold, it is usu-
Moche gold necklace depicting feline heads. Larco Museum Collection.
Lima-Peru
ally alloyed with base metals for use in jewelry, altering
its hardness and ductility, melting point, color and
other properties. Alloys with lower karat rating, typically
22k, 18k, 14k or 10k, contain higher percentages of
copper or other base metals or silver or palladium in the
alloy.[37] Nickel is toxic, and its release from nickel white
gold is controlled by legislation in Europe.[37] Palladiumgold
alloys are more expensive than those using nickel.
High-karat white gold alloys are more resistant to corrosion
than are either pure silver or sterling silver. The
Japanese craft of Mokume-gane exploits the color contrasts
between laminated colored gold alloys to produce
decorative wood-grain effects.
By 2014, the gold jewelry industry was escalating despite
a dip in gold prices. Demand in the first quarter of 2014
pushed turnover to $23.7 billion according to a World
Gold Council report.
4.2 Investment
Gold prices (US$ per troy ounce), in nominal US$ and inflation
adjusted US$.
Main article: Gold as an investment
The ISO 4217 currency code of gold is XAU.[49]
Many holders of gold store it in form of bullion coins or
bars as a hedge against inflation or other economic disruptions.
Modern bullion coins for investment or collector
purposes do not require good mechanical wear properties;
they are typically fine gold at 24k, although the American
Gold Eagle and the British gold sovereign continue to be
minted in 22k (0.92) metal in historical tradition, and the
South African Krugerrand, first released in 1967, is also
22k (0.92).[50]
The special issue Canadian Gold Maple Leaf coin contains
the highest purity gold of any bullion coin, at
99.999% or 0.99999, while the popular issue Canadian
Gold Maple Leaf coin has a purity of 99.99%. In 2006,
the United States Mint began producing the American
Buffalo gold bullion coin with a purity of 99.99%. The
Australian Gold Kangaroos were first coined in 1986 as
the Australian Gold Nugget but changed the reverse design
in 1989. Other modern coins include the Austrian
Vienna Philharmonic bullion coin and the Chinese Gold
Panda.
4.3 Electronics connectors
Only 10% of the world consumption of new gold produced
goes to industry,[12] but by far the most important
4.4 Non-electronic industry 5
industrial use for new gold is in fabrication of corrosionfree
electrical connectors in computers and other electrical
devices. For example, according to the World Gold
council, a typical cell phone may contain 50 mg of gold,
worth about 50 cents. But since nearly one billion cell
phones are produced each year, a gold value of 50 cents
in each phone adds to $500 million in gold from just this
application.[51]
Though gold is attacked by free chlorine, its good conductivity
and general resistance to oxidation and corrosion
in other environments (including resistance to nonchlorinated
acids) has led to its widespread industrial use
in the electronic era as a thin-layer coating on electrical
connectors, thereby ensuring good connection. For example,
gold is used in the connectors of the more expensive
electronics cables, such as audio, video and USB
cables. The benefit of using gold over other connector
metals such as tin in these applications has been debated;
gold connectors are often criticized by audio-visual experts
as unnecessary for most consumers and seen as simply
a marketing ploy. However, the use of gold in other
applications in electronic sliding contacts in highly humid
or corrosive atmospheres, and in use for contacts with
a very high failure cost (certain computers, communications
equipment, spacecraft, jet aircraft engines) remains
very common.[52]
Besides sliding electrical contacts, gold is also used in
electrical contacts because of its resistance to corrosion,
electrical conductivity, ductility and lack of toxicity.[53]
Switch contacts are generally subjected to more intense
corrosion stress than are sliding contacts. Fine gold wires
are used to connect semiconductor devices to their packages
through a process known as wire bonding.
The concentration of free electrons in gold metal is
5.90×1022 cm−3. Gold is highly conductive to electricity,
and has been used for electrical wiring in some highenergy
applications (only silver and copper are more conductive
per volume, but gold has the advantage of corrosion
resistance). For example, gold electrical wires were
used during some of the Manhattan Project's atomic experiments,
but large high-current silver wires were used
in the calutron isotope separator magnets in the project.
It’s estimated that 16% of the world’s gold and 22% of
the world’s silver is contained in electronic technology in
Japan.[54]
4.4 Non-electronic industry
 Gold solder is used for joining the components of
gold jewelry by high-temperature hard soldering or
brazing. If the work is to be of hallmarking quality,
the gold solder alloy must match the fineness (purity)
of the work, and alloy formulas are manufactured
to color-match yellow and white gold. Gold
solder is usually made in at least three melting-point
ranges referred to as Easy, Medium and Hard. By
Mirror for the future James Webb Space Telescope coated in gold
to reflect infrared light
The world’s largest gold bar has a mass of 250 kilograms (550
lb). Toi museum, Japan.
using the hard, high-melting point solder first, followed
by solders with progressively lower melting
points, goldsmiths can assemble complex items with
several separate soldered joints.
 Gold can be made into thread and used in
embroidery.
 Gold produces a deep, intense red color when used
as a coloring agent in cranberry glass.
 In photography, gold toners are used to shift the
color of silver bromide black-and-white prints towards
brown or blue tones, or to increase their stability.
Used on sepia-toned prints, gold toners produce
red tones. Kodak published formulas for sev6
4 MODERN APPLICATIONS
A gold nugget of 5 millimetres (0.20 in) in diameter (bottom) can
be expanded through hammering into a gold foil of about 0.5
square metres (5.4 sq ft). Toi museum, Japan.
eral types of gold toners, which use gold as the
chloride.[55]
 Gold is a good reflector of electromagnetic radiation
such as infrared and visible light, as well as radio
waves. It is used for the protective coatings on many
artificial satellites, in infrared protective faceplates
in thermal-protection suits and astronauts’ helmets,
and in electronic warfare planes such as the EA-6B
Prowler.
 Gold is used as the reflective layer on some high-end
CDs.
 Automobiles may use gold for heat shielding.
McLaren uses gold foil in the engine compartment
of its F1 model.[56]
 Gold can be manufactured so thin that it appears
semi-transparent. It is used in some aircraft cockpit
windows for de-icing or anti-icing by passing
electricity through it. The heat produced by the
resistance of the gold is enough to deter ice from
forming.[57]
4.5 Commercial chemistry
Gold is attacked by and dissolves in alkaline solutions
of potassium or sodium cyanide, to form the salt
gold cyanide—a technique that has been used in extracting
metallic gold from ores in the cyanide process.
Gold cyanide is the electrolyte used in commercial
electroplating of gold onto base metals and
electroforming.
Gold chloride (chloroauric acid) solutions are used to
make colloidal gold by reduction with citrate or ascorbate
ions. Gold chloride and gold oxide are used to make cranberry
or red-colored glass, which, like colloidal gold suspensions,
contains evenly sized spherical gold nanoparticles.[
58]
4.6 Medicine
Metallic and gold compounds have long been used for
medicinal purposes. Gold (usually as the metal) is
perhaps the most anciently administered medicine (apparently
by shamanic practitioners)[59] and known to
Dioscorides.[60][61] In medieval times, gold was often
seen as beneficial for the health, in the belief that something
so rare and beautiful could not be anything but
healthy. Even some modern esotericists and forms of
alternative medicine assign metallic gold a healing power.
In the 19th century gold had a reputation as a “nervine,”
a therapy for nervous disorders. Depression, epilepsy,
migraine, and glandular problems such as amenorrhea
and impotence were treated, and most notably alcoholism
(Keeley, 1897).[62]
The apparent paradox of the actual toxicology of the substance
suggests the possibility of serious gaps in the understanding
of the action of gold in physiology.[63] Only
salts and radioisotopes of gold are of pharmacological
value, since elemental (metallic) gold is inert to all chemicals
it encounters inside the body (i.e., ingested gold cannot
be attacked by stomach acid). Some gold salts do
have anti-inflammatory properties and at present two are
still used as pharmaceuticals in the treatment of arthritis
and other similar conditions in the US (sodium aurothiomalate
and auranofin). These drugs have been explored
as a means to help to reduce the pain and swelling
of rheumatoid arthritis, and also (historically) against
tuberculosis and some parasites.[64]
Gold alloys are used in restorative dentistry, especially in
tooth restorations, such as crowns and permanent bridges.
The gold alloys’ slight malleability facilitates the creation
of a superior molar mating surface with other teeth and
produces results that are generally more satisfactory than
those produced by the creation of porcelain crowns. The
use of gold crowns in more prominent teeth such as incisors
is favored in some cultures and discouraged in others.
Colloidal gold preparations (suspensions of gold nanoparticles)
in water are intensely red-colored, and can be
made with tightly controlled particle sizes up to a few
tens of nanometers across by reduction of gold chlo7
ride with citrate or ascorbate ions. Colloidal gold is
used in research applications in medicine, biology and
materials science. The technique of immunogold labeling
exploits the ability of the gold particles to adsorb protein
molecules onto their surfaces. Colloidal gold particles
coated with specific antibodies can be used as probes for
the presence and position of antigens on the surfaces of
cells.[65] In ultrathin sections of tissues viewed by electron
microscopy, the immunogold labels appear as extremely
dense round spots at the position of the antigen.[66]
Gold, or alloys of gold and palladium, are applied as conductive
coating to biological specimens and other nonconducting
materials such as plastics and glass to be
viewed in a scanning electron microscope. The coating,
which is usually applied by sputtering with an argon
plasma, has a triple role in this application. Gold’s very
high electrical conductivity drains electrical charge to
earth, and its very high density provides stopping power
for electrons in the electron beam, helping to limit the
depth to which the electron beam penetrates the specimen.
This improves definition of the position and topography
of the specimen surface and increases the spatial
resolution of the image. Gold also produces a high output
of secondary electrons when irradiated by an electron
beam, and these low-energy electrons are the most commonly
used signal source used in the scanning electron
microscope.[67]
The isotope gold-198 (half-life 2.7 days) is used, in
nuclear medicine, in some cancer treatments and for
treating other diseases.[68][69]
4.7 Food and drink
 Gold can be used in food and has the E number
175.[70] In 2016, the European Food Safety Authority
published an opinion on the re-evaluation
of gold (E 175) as a food additive. Concerns included
the possible presence of minute amounts of
gold nanoparticles in the food additive, and that gold
nanoparticles have been shown to be genotoxic in
mammalian cells in vitro.[71]
 Gold leaf, flake or dust is used on and in some
gourmet foods, notably sweets and drinks as decorative
ingredient.[72] Gold flake was used by the nobility
in medieval Europe as a decoration in food and
drinks, in the form of leaf, flakes or dust, either to
demonstrate the host’s wealth or in the belief that
something that valuable and rare must be beneficial
for one’s health.
 Danziger Goldwasser (German: Gold water of
Danzig) or Goldwasser (English: Goldwater) is a
traditional German herbal liqueur[73] produced in
what is today Gdańsk, Poland, and Schwabach, Germany,
and contains flakes of gold leaf. There are
also some expensive (~$1000) cocktails which contain
flakes of gold leaf.[74] However, since metallic
gold is inert to all body chemistry, it has no
taste, it provides no nutrition, and it leaves the body
unaltered.[75]
 Vark is a foil composed of a pure metal that is sometimes
gold,[76] and is used for garnishing sweets in
South Asian cuisine.
5 Monetary exchange (historical)
Gold is commonly formed into bars for use in monetary exchange.
Two golden 20 kr coins from the Scandinavian Monetary Union,
which was based on a gold standard. The coin to the left is
Swedish and the right one is Danish.
Gold has been widely used throughout the world as
money, for efficient indirect exchange (versus barter),
and to store wealth in hoards. For exchange purposes,
mints produce standardized gold bullion coins, bars and
other units of fixed weight and purity.
The first known coins containing gold were struck in Lydia,
Asia Minor, around 600 BC.[77] The talent coin of
gold in use during the periods of Grecian history both
before and during the time of the life of Homer weighed
between 8.42 and 8.75 grams.[78] From an earlier preference
in using silver, European economies re-established
the minting of gold as coinage during the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries.[79]
8 6 CULTURAL HISTORY
Bills (that mature into gold coin) and gold certificates
(convertible into gold coin at the issuing bank) added to
the circulating stock of gold standard money in most 19th
century industrial economies. In preparation for World
War I the warring nations moved to fractional gold standards,
inflating their currencies to finance the war effort.
Post-war, the victorious countries, most notably Britain,
gradually restored gold-convertibility, but international
flows of gold via bills of exchange remained embargoed;
international shipments were made exclusively for bilateral
trades or to pay war reparations.
After World War II gold was replaced by a system of
nominally convertible currencies related by fixed exchange
rates following the Bretton Woods system. Gold
standards and the direct convertibility of currencies to
gold have been abandoned by world governments, led
in 1971 by the United States’ refusal to redeem its dollars
in gold. Fiat currency now fills most monetary roles.
Switzerland was the last country to tie its currency to
gold; it backed 40% of its value until the Swiss joined
the International Monetary Fund in 1999.[80]
Central banks continue to keep a portion of their liquid
reserves as gold in some form, and metals exchanges
such as the London Bullion Market Association still clear
transactions denominated in gold, including future delivery
contracts. Today, gold mining output is declining.[81]
With the sharp growth of economies in the 20th century,
and increasing foreign exchange, the world’s gold reserves
and their trading market have become a small fraction of
all markets and fixed exchange rates of currencies to gold
have been replaced by floating prices for gold and gold
future contract. Though the gold stock grows by only 1 or
2% per year, very little metal is irretrievably consumed.
Inventory above ground would satisfy many decades of
industrial and even artisan uses at current prices.
The gold proportion (fineness) of alloys is measured by
karat (k). Pure gold (commercially termed fine gold) is
designated as 24 karat, abbreviated 24k. English gold
coins intended for circulation from 1526 into the 1930s
were typically a standard 22k alloy called crown gold,[82]
for hardness (American gold coins for circulation after
1837 contain an alloy of 0.900 fine gold, or 21.6 kt).[83]
Although the prices of some platinum group metals can
be much higher, gold has long been considered the most
desirable of precious metals, and its value has been used
as the standard for many currencies. Gold has been used
as a symbol for purity, value, royalty, and particularly
roles that combine these properties. Gold as a sign of
wealth and prestige was ridiculed by Thomas More in
his treatise Utopia. On that imaginary island, gold is so
abundant that it is used to make chains for slaves, tableware,
and lavatory seats. When ambassadors from other
countries arrive, dressed in ostentatious gold jewels and
badges, the Utopians mistake them for menial servants,
paying homage instead to the most modestly dressed of
their party.
6 Cultural history
The Turin Papyrus Map
Funerary mask of Tutankhamun
Gold artifacts found at the Nahal Kana cave cemetery
dated during the 1980s, showed these to be from within
the Chalcolithic, and considered the earliest find from the
Levant (Gopher et al. 1990).[84] Gold artifacts in the
Balkans also appear from the 4th millennium BC, such
as those found in the Varna Necropolis near Lake Varna
in Bulgaria, thought by one source (La Niece 2009) to
be the earliest “well-dated” find of gold artifacts.[85] Gold
artifacts such as the golden hats and the Nebra disk appeared
in Central Europe from the 2nd millennium BC
Bronze Age.
The oldest known map of a gold mine was drawn in
the 19th Dynasty of Ancient Egypt (1320–1200 BCE),
whereas the first written reference to gold was recorded
in the 12th Dynasty around 1900 BCE.[86] Egyptian hieroglyphs
from as early as 2600 BC describe gold, which
9
Jason returns with the golden fleece on an Apulian red-figure
calyx krater, ca. 340–330 BC.
King Tushratta of the Mitanni claimed was “more plentiful
than dirt” in Egypt.[87] Egypt and especially Nubia had
the resources to make them major gold-producing areas
for much of history. One of the earliest known maps,
known as the Turin Papyrus Map, shows the plan of a
gold mine in Nubia together with indications of the local
geology. The primitive working methods are described
by both Strabo and Diodorus Siculus, and included firesetting.
Large mines were also present across the Red Sea
in what is now Saudi Arabia.
The legend of the golden fleece may refer to the use of
fleeces to trap gold dust from placer deposits in the ancient
world. Gold is mentioned frequently in the Old Testament,
starting with Genesis 2:11 (at Havilah), the story
of The Golden Calf and many parts of the temple including
the Menorah and the golden altar. In the New Testament,
it is included with the gifts of the magi in the first
chapters of Matthew. The Book of Revelation 21:21 describes
the city of New Jerusalem as having streets “made
of pure gold, clear as crystal”. Exploitation of gold in the
south-east corner of the Black Sea is said to date from the
time of Midas, and this gold was important in the establishment
of what is probably the world’s earliest coinage
in Lydia around 610 BC.[77] From the 6th or 5th century
BC, the Chu (state) circulated the Ying Yuan, one kind
of square gold coin.
In Roman metallurgy, new methods for extracting gold
on a large scale were developed by introducing hydraulic
Ancient golden Kritonios Crown, funerary or marriage material,
370–360 BC. From a grave in Armento, Campania
mining methods, especially in Hispania from 25 BC onwards
and in Dacia from 106 AD onwards. One of their
largest mines was at Las Medulas in León (Spain), where
seven long aqueducts enabled them to sluice most of a
large alluvial deposit. The mines at Roşia Montană in
Transylvania were also very large, and until very recently,
still mined by opencast methods. They also exploited
smaller deposits in Britain, such as placer and hard-rock
deposits at Dolaucothi. The various methods they used
are well described by Pliny the Elder in his encyclopedia
Naturalis Historia written towards the end of the first century
AD.
During Mansa Musa's (ruler of the Mali Empire from
1312 to 1337) hajj to Mecca in 1324, he passed through
Cairo in July 1324, and was reportedly accompanied by a
camel train that included thousands of people and nearly
a hundred camels where he gave away so much gold that
it depressed the price in Egypt for over a decade, causing
high inflation.[88] A contemporary Arab historian remarked:
Gold was at a high price in Egypt until
they came in that year. The mithqal did not go
below 25 dirhams and was generally above, but
from that time its value fell and it cheapened
in price and has remained cheap till now. The
mithqal does not exceed 22 dirhams or less.
10 7 OCCURRENCE
This has been the state of affairs for about
twelve years until this day by reason of the
large amount of gold which they brought into
Egypt and spent there [...].
— Chihab Al-Umari, Kingdom of Mali[89]
The European exploration of the Americas was fueled
in no small part by reports of the gold ornaments displayed
in great profusion by Native American peoples,
especially in Mesoamerica, Peru, Ecuador and Colombia.
The Aztecs regarded gold as the product of the gods, calling
it literally “god excrement” (teocuitlatl in Nahuatl),
and after Moctezuma II was killed, most of this gold was
shipped to Spain.[90] However, for the indigenous peoples
of North America gold was considered useless and they
saw much greater value in other minerals which were directly
related to their utility, such as obsidian, flint, and
slate.[91] Rumors of cities filled with gold fueled legends
of El Dorado.
Gold played a role in western culture, as a cause for desire
and of corruption, as told in children’s fables such as
Rumpelstiltskin, where the peasant’s daughter turns hay
into gold, in return for giving up her child when she becomes
a princess; and the stealing of the hen that lays
golden eggs in Jack and the Beanstalk.
The top prize at the Olympic games is the gold medal.
75% of the presently accounted for gold has been extracted
since 1910. It has been estimated that the currently
known amount of gold internationally would form
a single cube 20 m (66 ft) on a side (equivalent to 8,000
m3).[92]
One main goal of the alchemists was to produce gold from
other substances, such as lead — presumably by the interaction
with a mythical substance called the philosopher’s
stone. Although they never succeeded in this attempt, the
alchemists did promote an interest in systematically finding
out what can be done with substances, and this laid
the foundation for today’s chemistry. Their symbol for
gold was the circle with a point at its center (☉), which
was also the astrological symbol and the ancient Chinese
character for the Sun.
Golden treasures have been rumored to be found at various
locations, following tragedies such as the Jewish temple
treasures in the Vatican, following the temple’s destruction
in 70 AD, a gold stash on the Titanic, the Nazi
gold train – following World War II.
The Dome of the Rock on the Jerusalem temple site
is covered with an ultra-thin golden glasure. The Sikh
Golden temple, the Harmandir Sahib, is a building covered
with gold. Similarly the Wat Phra Kaew emerald
Buddhist temple (wat) in Thailand has ornamental
gold-leafed statues and roofs. Some European king and
queen’s crowns were made of gold, and gold was used
for the bridal crown since antiquity. An ancient Talmudic
text circa 100 AD describes Rachel, wife of Rabbi
Akiva, receiving a “Jerusalem of Gold” (diadem). A
Greek burial crown made of gold was found in a grave
circa 370 BC.
7 Occurrence
This 156-troy-ounce (4.9 kg) nugget, known as the Mojave
Nugget, was found by an individual prospector in the Southern
California Desert using a metal detector.
Gold’s atomic number of 79 makes it one of the higher
atomic number elements that occur naturally. Traditionally,
gold is thought to have formed by the R-process in
supernova nucleosynthesis,[93] but a relatively recent paper
suggests that gold and other elements heavier than
iron may also be produced in quantity by the collision
of neutron stars.[94] In both cases, satellite spectrometers
only indirectly detect the resulting gold: “we have
no spectroscopic evidence that [such] elements have truly
been produced.”[95]
These gold nucleogenesis theories hold that the resulting
explosions scattered metal-containing dusts (including
heavy elements such as gold) into the region of space
in which they later condensed into our solar system and
the Earth.[96] Because the Earth was molten when it was
just formed, almost all of the gold present on Earth sank
into the core. Most of the gold that is present today in the
Earth’s crust and mantle is thought to have been delivered
to Earth later, by asteroid impacts during the Late Heavy
Bombardment.[7][8]
The asteroid that formed Vredefort crater 2.020 billion
years ago is often credited with seeding the
Witwatersrand basin in South Africa with the richest
gold deposits on earth.[97][98][99][100] However, the
gold-bearing Witwatersrand rocks were laid down between
700 and 950 million years before the Vredefort
impact.[101][102] These gold-bearing rocks had furthermore
been covered by a thick layer of Ventersdorp lavas
and the Transvaal Supergroup of rocks before the meteor
struck. What the Vredefort impact achieved, how7.1
Seawater 11
Schematic of a NE (left) to SW (right) cross-section through the
2.020 billion year old Vredefort impact crater in South Africa
and how it distorted the contemporary geological structures. The
present erosion level is shown. Johannesburg is located where the
Witwatersrand Basin (the yellow layer) is exposed at the “present
surface” line, just inside the crater rim, on the left. Not to scale.
ever, was to distort the Witwatersrand basin in such a way
that the gold-bearing rocks were brought to the present
erosion surface in Johannesburg, on the Witwatersrand,
just inside the rim of the original 300 km diameter crater
caused by the meteor strike. The discovery of the deposit
in 1886 launched the Witwatersrand Gold Rush.
Some 22% of all the gold that is ascertained to exist today
on Earth has been extracted from these Witwatersrand
rocks.[102]
On Earth, gold is found in ores in rock formed from the
Precambrian time onward.[85] It most often occurs as a
native metal, typically in a metal solid solution with silver
(i.e. as a gold silver alloy). Such alloys usually have a
silver content of 8–10%. Electrum is elemental gold with
more than 20% silver. Electrum’s color runs from goldensilvery
to silvery, dependent upon the silver content. The
more silver, the lower the specific gravity.
Native gold occurs as very small to microscopic particles
embedded in rock, often together with quartz or sulfide
minerals such as “Fool’s Gold”, which is a pyrite.[103]
These are called lode deposits. The metal in a native state
is also found in the form of free flakes, grains or larger
nuggets[85] that have been eroded from rocks and end up
in alluvial deposits called placer deposits. Such free gold
is always richer at the surface of gold-bearing veins owing
to the oxidation of accompanying minerals followed
by weathering, and washing of the dust into streams and
rivers, where it collects and can be welded by water action
to form nuggets.
Gold sometimes occurs combined with tellurium as the
minerals calaverite, krennerite, nagyagite, petzite and
sylvanite (see telluride minerals), and as the rare bismuthide
maldonite (Au2Bi) and antimonide aurostibite
(AuSb2). Gold also occurs in rare alloys with copper,
lead, and mercury: the minerals auricupride (Cu3Au),
novodneprite (AuPb3) and weishanite ((Au, Ag)3Hg2).
Recent research suggests that microbes can sometimes
play an important role in forming gold deposits, transporting
and precipitating gold to form grains and nuggets
that collect in alluvial deposits.[104]
Another recent study has claimed water in faults vaporizes
during an earthquake, depositing gold. When an
Relative sizes of an 860 kg block of gold ore, and the 30 g of gold
that can be extracted from it. Toi gold mine, Japan.
Gold left behind after a pyrite cube was oxidized to hematite. Note
cubic shape of cavity.
earthquake strikes, it moves along a fault. Water often
lubricates faults, filling in fractures and jogs. About 6
miles (10 kilometers) below the surface, under incredible
temperatures and pressures, the water carries high concentrations
of carbon dioxide, silica, and gold. During an
earthquake, the fault jog suddenly opens wider. The water
inside the void instantly vaporizes, flashing to steam
and forcing silica, which forms the mineral quartz, and
gold out of the fluids and onto nearby surfaces.[105]
7.1 Seawater
The world’s oceans contain gold. Measured concentrations
of gold in the Atlantic and Northeast Pacific are 50–
150 femtomol/L or 10–30 parts per quadrillion (about
10–30 g/km3). In general, gold concentrations for south
Atlantic and central Pacific samples are the same (~50
femtomol/L) but less certain. Mediterranean deep waters
contain slightly higher concentrations of gold (100–150
femtomol/L) attributed to wind-blown dust and/or rivers.
At 10 parts per quadrillion the Earth’s oceans would hold
15,000 tonnes of gold.[106] These figures are three orders
12 9 MINING
of magnitude less than reported in the literature prior to
1988, indicating contamination problems with the earlier
data.
A number of people have claimed to be able to economically
recover gold from sea water, but so far they have
all been either mistaken or acted in an intentional deception.
Prescott Jernegan ran a gold-from-seawater swindle
in the United States in the 1890s. A British fraudster ran
the same scam in England in the early 1900s.[107] Fritz
Haber (the German inventor of the Haber process) did
research on the extraction of gold from sea water in an
effort to help pay Germany's reparations following World
War I.[108] Based on the published values of 2 to 64 ppb
of gold in seawater a commercially successful extraction
seemed possible. After analysis of 4,000 water samples
yielding an average of 0.004 ppb it became clear that
the extraction would not be possible and he stopped the
project.[109] No commercially viable mechanism for performing
gold extraction from sea water has yet been identified.
Gold synthesis is not economically viable and is
unlikely to become so in the foreseeable future.
8 Production
Main article: List of countries by gold production
The World Gold Council states that as of the end of
Gold exports by country (2014).[110]
2014, “there were 183,600 tonnes of stocks in existence
above ground”. This can be represented by a cube with
an edge length of about 21 meters.[111] At $1,075 per troy
ounce, 183,600 metric tonnes of gold would have a value
of $6.3 trillion.
As of 2014, the world’s largest gold producer by far was
China with 450 tonnes and it was expected to reach 490
in 2015. The second-largest producer, Australia, mined
274 tonnes in the same year, followed by Russia with 247
tonnes.[13]
The entrance to an underground gold mine in Victoria, Australia
Pure gold precipitate produced by the aqua regia refining process
1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020
Year
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Production in tons / year
Time trend of gold production
9 Mining
Main article: Gold mining
Since the 1880s, South Africa has been the source for a
large proportion of the world’s gold supply, with about
50% of the presently accounted for gold having come
from South Africa. Production in 1970 accounted for
79% of the world supply, producing about 1,480 tonnes.
13
In 2007 China (with 276 tonnes) overtook South Africa
as the world’s largest gold producer, the first time since
1905 that South Africa has not been the largest.[112]
As of 2014, China was the world’s leading gold-mining
country, followed in order by Australia, Russia, the
United States, Canada, and Peru. South Africa, which
had dominated world gold production for most of the 20th
century, had declined to sixth place.[13] Other major producers
are the Ghana, Burkina Faso, Mali, Indonesia and
Uzbekistan.
In South America, the controversial project Pascua Lama
aims at exploitation of rich fields in the high mountains
of Atacama Desert, at the border between Chile and
Argentina.
Today about one-quarter of the world gold output is
estimated to originate from artisanal or small scale
mining.[113]
The city of Johannesburg located in South Africa was
founded as a result of the Witwatersrand Gold Rush
which resulted in the discovery of some of the largest
natural gold deposits in recorded history. The gold fields
are confined to the northern and north-western edges of
the Witwatersrand basin, which is a 5–7 km thick layer
of archean rocks located, in most places, deep under
the Free State, Gauteng and surrounding provinces.[114]
These Witwatersrand rocks are exposed at the surface on
the Witwatersrand, in and around Johannesburg, but also
in isolated patches to the south-east and south-west of
Johannesburg, as well as in an arc around the Vredefort
Dome which lies close to the center of the Witwatersrand
basin.[101][114] From these surface exposures the basin
dips extensively, requiring some of the mining to occur
at depths of nearly 4000 m, making them, especially the
Savuka and TauTona mines to the south-west of Johannesburg,
the deepest mines on earth. The gold is found
only in six areas where archean rivers from the north and
north-west formed extensive pebbly braided river deltas
before draining into the “Witwatersrand sea” where the
rest of the Witwatersrand sediments were deposited.[114]
The Second Boer War of 1899–1901 between the British
Empire and the Afrikaner Boers was at least partly over
the rights of miners and possession of the gold wealth in
South Africa.
9.1 Prospecting
Main article: Gold prospecting
During the 19th century, gold rushes occurred whenever
large gold deposits were discovered. The first documented
discovery of gold in the United States was
at the Reed Gold Mine near Georgeville, North Carolina
in 1803.[115] The first major gold strike in the
United States occurred in a small north Georgia town
called Dahlonega.[116] Further gold rushes occurred in
California, Colorado, the Black Hills, Otago in New
Zealand, Australia, Witwatersrand in South Africa, and
the Klondike in Canada.
A miner underground at Pumsaint gold mine Wales; c. 1938?.
10 Bioremediation
A sample of the fungus Aspergillus niger was found growing
from gold mining solution; and was found to contain
cyano metal complexes; such as gold, silver, copper iron
and zinc. The fungus also plays a role in the solubilization
of heavy metal sulfides.[117]
11 Extraction
Main article: Gold extraction
Gold extraction is most economical in large, easily mined
deposits. Ore grades as little as 0.5 parts per million
(ppm) can be economical. Typical ore grades in openpit
mines are 1–5 ppm; ore grades in underground or hard
rock mines are usually at least 3 ppm. Because ore grades
of 30 ppm are usually needed before gold is visible to the
naked eye, in most gold mines the gold is invisible.
The average gold mining and extraction costs were about
$317 per troy ounce in 2007, but these can vary widely
depending on mining type and ore quality; global mine
production amounted to 2,471.1 tonnes.[118]
11.1 Refining
After initial production, gold is often subsequently refined
industrially by the Wohlwill process which is based
on electrolysis or by the Miller process, that is chlorination
in the melt. The Wohlwill process results in higher
purity, but is more complex and is only applied in smallscale
installations.[119][120] Other methods of assaying and
purifying smaller amounts of gold include parting and
14 15 TOXICITY
inquartation as well as cupellation, or refining methods
based on the dissolution of gold in aqua regia.[121]
12 Synthesis from other elements
The production of gold from a more common element,
such as lead, has long been a subject of human inquiry,
and the ancient and medieval discipline of alchemy often
focused on it; however, the transmutation of the chemical
elements did not become possible until the understanding
of nuclear physics in the 20th century. The first synthesis
of gold was conducted by Japanese physicist Hantaro
Nagaoka, who synthesized gold from mercury in 1924 by
neutron bombardment.[122] An American team, working
without knowledge of Nagaoka’s prior study, conducted
the same experiment in 1941, achieving the same result
and showing that the isotopes of gold produced by it were
all radioactive.[123]
Gold can currently be manufactured in a nuclear reactor
by irradiation either of platinum or mercury.
Only the mercury isotope 196Hg, which occurs with a frequency
of 0.15% in natural mercury, can be converted to
gold by neutron capture, and following electron capturedecay
into 197Au with slow neutrons. Other mercury isotopes
are converted when irradiated with slow neutrons
into one another, or formed mercury isotopes which beta
decay into thallium.
Using fast neutrons, the mercury isotope 198Hg, which
composes 9.97% of natural mercury, can be converted by
splitting off a neutron and becoming 197Hg, which then
disintegrates to stable gold. This reaction, however, possesses
a smaller activation cross-section and is feasible
only with un-moderated reactors.
It is also possible to eject several neutrons with very high
energy into the other mercury isotopes in order to form
197Hg. However such high-energy neutrons can be produced
only by particle accelerators.
13 Consumption
The consumption of gold produced in the world is
about 50% in jewelry, 40% in investments, and 10% in
industry.[12][124]
According to World Gold Council, China is the world’s
largest single consumer of gold in 2013 and toppled India
for the first time with Chinese consumption increasing by
32 percent in a year, while that of India only rose by 13
percent and world consumption rose by 21 percent. Unlike
India where gold is mainly used for jewelry, China
uses gold for manufacturing and retail.[125]
14 Pollution
Further information: Mercury cycle and International
Cyanide Management Code
Gold production is associated with contribution to hazardous
pollution.[129][130]
Low-grade gold ore may contain less than one ppm gold
metal; such ore is ground and mixed with sodium cyanide
to dissolve the gold. Cyanide is a highly poisonous chemical,
which can kill living creatures when exposed in
minute quantities. Many cyanide spills[131] from gold
mines have occurred in both developed and developing
countries which killed aquatic life in long stretches of
affected rivers. Environmentalists consider these events
major environmental disasters.[132][133] Thirty tons of
used ore is dumped as waste for producing one troy ounce
of gold.[134] Gold ore dumps are the source of many heavy
elements such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, arsenic,
selenium and mercury. When sulfide bearing minerals
in these ore dumps are exposed to air and water, the
sulfide transforms into sulfuric acid which in turn dissolves
these heavy metals facilitating their passage into
surface water and ground water. This process is called
acid mine drainage. These gold ore dumps are long term,
highly hazardous wastes second only to nuclear waste
dumps.[134]
It was once common to use mercury to recover gold
from ore, but today the use of mercury is largely limited
to small-scale individual miners.[135] Minute quantities
of mercury compounds can reach water bodies, causing
heavy metal contamination. Mercury can then enter
into the human food chain in the form of methylmercury.
Mercury poisoning in humans causes incurable brain
function damage and severe retardation.
Gold extraction is also a highly energy intensive industry,
extracting ore from deep mines and grinding the
large quantity of ore for further chemical extraction requires
nearly 25 kW·h of electricity per gram of gold
produced.[136]
15 Toxicity
Pure metallic (elemental) gold is non-toxic and nonirritating
when ingested[137] and is sometimes used as a
food decoration in the form of gold leaf.[138] Metallic gold
is also a component of the alcoholic drinks Goldschläger,
Gold Strike, and Goldwasser. Metallic gold is approved
as a food additive in the EU (E175 in the Codex Alimentarius).
Although the gold ion is toxic, the acceptance
of metallic gold as a food additive is due to its relative
chemical inertness, and resistance to being corroded or
transformed into soluble salts (gold compounds) by any
known chemical process which would be encountered in
the human body.
15
Soluble compounds (gold salts) such as gold chloride are
toxic to the liver and kidneys. Common cyanide salts
of gold such as potassium gold cyanide, used in gold
electroplating, are toxic by virtue of both their cyanide
and gold content. There are rare cases of lethal gold poisoning
from potassium gold cyanide.[139][140] Gold toxicity
can be ameliorated with chelation therapy with an
agent such as dimercaprol.
Gold metal was voted Allergen of the Year in 2001 by
the American Contact Dermatitis Society. Gold contact
allergies affect mostly women.[141] Despite this, gold is a
relatively non-potent contact allergen, in comparison with
metals like nickel.[142]
16 Price
Further information: Gold as an investment
As at December 2015, gold is valued at around $39 per
Gold price history in 1960–2011
gram ($1,200 per troy ounce).
Like other precious metals, gold is measured by troy
weight and by grams. The proportion of gold in the alloy
is measured by karat (k), with 24 karat (24k) being
pure gold, and lower karat numbers proportionally less.
The purity of a gold bar or coin can also be expressed
as a decimal figure ranging from 0 to 1, known as the
millesimal fineness, such as 0.995 being nearly pure.
16.1 History
The price of gold is determined through trading in the
gold and derivatives markets, but a procedure known as
the Gold Fixing in London, originating in September
1919, provides a daily benchmark price to the industry.
The afternoon fixing was introduced in 1968 to provide a
price when US markets are open.[143]
Historically gold coinage was widely used as currency;
when paper money was introduced, it typically was a
receipt redeemable for gold coin or bullion. In a monetary
system known as the gold standard, a certain weight of
gold was given the name of a unit of currency. For a
long period, the United States government set the value of
the US dollar so that one troy ounce was equal to $20.67
($0.665 per gram), but in 1934 the dollar was devalued
to $35.00 per troy ounce ($0.889/g). By 1961, it was becoming
hard to maintain this price, and a pool of US and
European banks agreed to manipulate the market to prevent
further currency devaluation against increased gold
demand.[144]
On 17 March 1968, economic circumstances caused the
collapse of the gold pool, and a two-tiered pricing scheme
was established whereby gold was still used to settle international
accounts at the old $35.00 per troy ounce
($1.13/g) but the price of gold on the private market was
allowed to fluctuate; this two-tiered pricing system was
abandoned in 1975 when the price of gold was left to
find its free-market level. Central banks still hold historical
gold reserves as a store of value although the level
has generally been declining. The largest gold depository
in the world is that of the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank in
New York, which holds about 3%[145] of the gold known
to exist and accounted for today, as does the similarly
laden U.S. Bullion Depository at Fort Knox. In 2005 the
World Gold Council estimated total global gold supply to
be 3,859 tonnes and demand to be 3,754 tonnes, giving a
surplus of 105 tonnes.[146]
Sometime around 1970 the price began in trend to greatly
increase,[147] and between 1968 and 2000 the price of
gold ranged widely, from a high of $850 per troy ounce
($27.33/g) on 21 January 1980, to a low of $252.90 per
troy ounce ($8.13/g) on 21 June 1999 (London Gold
Fixing).[148] Prices increased rapidly from 2001, but the
1980 high was not exceeded until 3 January 2008 when a
new maximum of $865.35 per troy ounce was set.[149]
Another record price was set on 17 March 2008 at
$1023.50 per troy ounce ($32.91/g).[149]
In late 2009, gold markets experienced renewed momentum
upwards due to increased demand and a weakening
US dollar. On 2 December 2009, Gold reached a new
high closing at $1,217.23.[150] Gold further rallied hitting
new highs in May 2010 after the European Union
debt crisis prompted further purchase of gold as a safe
asset.[151][152] On 1 March 2011, gold hit a new all-time
high of $1432.57, based on investor concerns regarding
ongoing unrest in North Africa as well as in the Middle
East.[153]
From April 2001 to August 2011, spot gold prices more
than quintupled in value against the US dollar, hitting a
new all-time high of $1,913.50 on 23 August 2011,[154]
prompting speculation that the long secular bear market
had ended and a bull market had returned.[155] However,
the price then began a slow decline towards $1200 per
troy ounce in late 2014 and 2015.
16 19 REFERENCES
Gold bars at the Emperor Casino in Macau
17 Symbolism
Great human achievements are frequently rewarded with
gold, in the form of gold medals, golden trophies and
other decorations. Winners of athletic events and other
graded competitions are usually awarded a gold medal.
Many awards such as the Nobel Prize are made from gold
as well. Other award statues and prizes are depicted in
gold or are gold plated (such as the Academy Awards,
the Golden Globe Awards, the Emmy Awards, the Palme
d'Or, and the British Academy Film Awards).
Aristotle in his ethics used gold symbolism when referring
to what is now commonly known as the golden mean.
Similarly, gold is associated with perfect or divine principles,
such as in the case of the golden ratio and the golden
rule.
Gold is further associated with the wisdom of aging and
fruition. The fiftieth wedding anniversary is golden. Our
most valued or most successful latter years are sometimes
considered “golden years”. The height of a civilization is
referred to as a "golden age".
In some forms of Christianity and Judaism, gold has been
associated both with holiness and evil. In the Book of
Exodus, the Golden Calf is a symbol of idolatry, while
in the Book of Genesis, Abraham was said to be rich in
gold and silver, and Moses was instructed to cover the
Mercy Seat of the Ark of the Covenant with pure gold.
In Byzantine iconography the halos of Christ, Mary and
the Christian saints are often golden.
According to Christopher Columbus, those who had
something of gold were in possession of something of
great value on Earth and a substance to even help souls
to paradise.[156]
Wedding rings have long been made of gold. It is long
lasting and unaffected by the passage of time and may aid
in the ring symbolism of eternal vows before God and the
perfection the marriage signifies. In Orthodox Christian
wedding ceremonies, the wedded couple is adorned with
a golden crown (though some opt for wreaths, instead)
during the ceremony, an amalgamation of symbolic rites.
In popular culture gold has many connotations but is
most generally connected to terms such as good or great,
such as in the phrases: “has a heart of gold”, “that’s
golden!", “golden moment”, “then you're golden!" and
“golden boy”. It remains a cultural symbol of wealth and
through that, in many societies, success.