Today I want to tell you about Peter the Great Saint-Petersburg Polytechnic University. I am a student of Polytech and I know it is very good and old university with long history. It is one of the biggest university in Saint-Petersburg. Now about history.
Saint Petersburg Polytechnic Institute was founded in 1899 as the most advanced engineering school in Russia. The main persons promoting the creation of this university was the Minister of Finance Witte, the Deputy Minister of Finance Kovalevsky and D. I. Mendeleev a distinguished Russian research chemist. The institute was opened to students on October 1, 1902. Originally there were four departments: Economics, Shipbuilding, Electro-mechanics and Metallurgy.
On June 5, 1918 the institute was renamed to First Polytechnic Institute. In November 1918 Sovnarkom abolished all forms of scientific decrees, licenses and certifications. Departments were renamed Faculties, and the director became rector. In March 1919 two additional faculties were formed: Physico-mechanics and Chemistry. 
In April 1934 most of institutes were merged back into the Leningrad Industrial Institute. In November 1940 the Institute got its original name back. Now it was named the Kalinin Politechnical Institute. 
With the onset of the Great Patriotic War 3500 students went to the Army, and hundreds were involved in constructing fortifications. The main building was transformed into a hospital, and another building was used as a tank school. Institute signed military contracts. Some faculties and students were evacuated to Tashkent in January 1943; where they were able to start classes. In November 1943 they restarted classes in Leningrad as well. In 1943 in Leningrad there were 250 students and 90 teachers at the Institute. The Polytechnic Institute was the only school in the besieged city that had the authority to evaluate the Candidate and Doctor of Science dissertations. Before the end of the siege they evaluated 19 dissertations. After the end of the war the Institute was rebuilt.
In 1988 the new Physics-Technical Faculty was created. The Faculty is based on the Ioffe Physico-Technical Institute and headed by the director of the Ioffe Institute Zhores Ivanovich Alferov.
In September 1991 Leningrad returned its historical name Saint Petersburg and the Institute was renamed Saint Petersburg State Polytechnic University.
One year ago University was renamed again to historic name - Peter the Great Saint-Petersburg Polytechnic University.
Some general information about Polytechnic University:
Total number of students  - about 26 thousands
Teaching staff – 2.5 thousands
Total number of buildings – 112
Students dormitories – 15
Total area - 102 hectares
12 Institutes
Among scientists who studied and worked in the Polytechnic University are three Nobel Prize winners: N.N.Semenov, P.L.Kapiza, Zh.I.Alferov.
I think, Polytech will be evolve. And our professors grow up new Nobel Prize winners.
